1.3 Computer-System Architecture 17

1.3.3 Clustered Systems

Another type of multiprocessor system is a clustered system, which gathers
together multiple CPUs. Clustered systems differ from the multiprocessor
systems described in Section 1.3.2 in that they are composed of two or more
individual systems?or nodes ?joined together. Such systems are considered
loosely coupled. Each node may be a single processor system or a multicore
system. We should note that the definition of clustered is not concrete; many
commercial packages wrestle to define a clustered system and why one form
is better than another. The generally accepted definition is that clustered
computers share storage and are closely linked via a local-area network LAN
(as described in Chapter 17) or a faster interconnect, such as InfiniBand.

Clustering is usually used to provide high-availability service?that is,
service will continue even if one or more systems in the cluster fail. Generally,
we obtain high availability by adding a level of redundancy in the system.
A layer of cluster software runs on the cluster nodes. Each node can monitor
one or more of the others (over the LAN). If the monitored machine fails,
the monitoring machine can take ownership of its storage and restart the
applications that were running on the failed machine. The users and clients of
the applications see only a brief interruption of service.

Clustering can be structured asymmetrically or symmetrically. In asym-
metric clustering, one machine is in hot-standby mode while the other is
running the applications. The hot-standby host machine does nothing but
monitor the active server. If that server fails, the hot-standby host becomes
the active server. In symmetric clustering, two or more hosts are running
applications and are monitoring each other. This structure is obviously more
efficient, as it uses all of the available hardware. However it does require that
more than one application be available to run.

Since a cluster consists of several computer systems connected via a
network, clusters can also be used to provide high-performance computing
environments. Such systems can supply significantly greater computational
power than single-processor or even SMP systems because they can run an
application concurrently on all computers in the cluster. The application must
have been written specifically to take advantage of the cluster, however. This
involves a technique known as parallelization, which divides a program into
separate components that run in parallel on individual computers in the cluster.
Typically, these applications are designed so that once each computing node in
the cluster has solved its portion of the problem, the results from all the nodes
are combined into a final solution.

Other forms of clusters include parallel clusters and clustering over a
wide-area network (WAN) (as described in Chapter 17). Parallel clusters allow
multiple hosts to access the same data on shared storage. Because most
operating systems lack support for simultaneous data access by multiple hosts,
parallel clusters usually require the use of special versions of software and
special releases of applications. For example, Oracle Real Application Cluster
is a version of Oracle?s database that has been designed to run on a parallel
cluster. Each machine runs Oracle, and a layer of software tracks access to the
shared disk. Each machine has full access to all data in the database. To provide
this shared access, the system must also supply access control and locking to