16

Chapter 1 Introduction

of memory addressable in the system. Either way, multiprocessing can cause
a system to change its memory access model from uniform memory access
(UMA) to non-uniform memory access (NUMA). UMA is defined as the situation
in which access to any RAM from any CPU takes the same amount of time. With
NUMA, some parts of memory may take longer to access than other parts,
creating a performance penalty. Operating systems can minimize the NUMA
penalty through resource management, as discussed in Section 9.5.4.

A recent trend in CPU design is to include multiple computing cores
on a single chip. Such multiprocessor systems are termed multicore. They
can be more efficient than multiple chips with single cores because on-chip
communication is faster than between-chip communication. In addition, one
chip with multiple cores uses significantly less power than multiple single-core
chips.

It is important to note that while multicore systems are multiprocessor
systems, not all multiprocessor systems are multicore, as we shall see in Section
1.3.3. In our coverage of multiprocessor systems throughout this text, unless
we state otherwise, we generally use the more contemporary term multicore,
which excludes some multiprocessor systems.

In Figure 1.7, we show a dual-core design with two cores on the same
chip. In this design, each core has its own register set as well as its own local
cache. Other designs might use a shared cache or a combination of local and
shared caches. Aside from architectural considerations, such as cache, memory,
and bus contention, these multicore CPUs appear to the operating system as
N standard processors. This characteristic puts pressure on operating system
designers?and application programmers?to make use of those processing
cores.

Finally, blade servers are a relatively recent development in which multiple
processor boards, I/O boards, and networking boards are placed in the same
chassis. The difference between these and traditional multiprocessor systems
is that each blade-processor board boots independently and runs its own
operating system. Some blade-server boards are multiprocessor as well, which
blurs the lines between types of computers. In essence, these servers consist of
multiple independent multiprocessor systems.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CPU coreo CPU core1
registers registers
cache cache
memory

 

 

 

Figure 1.7 A dual-core design with two cores placed on the same chip.